---
title:  "The Beginning"
---

## Rise of the Machines

Machine learning is a rapidly developing field at the intersection of computer
science and mathematics.  Recent breakthroughs in [deep neural networks] in the
last decade are paving the way for amazing applications in the near-term, like
[self-driving cars] and personal assistants capable of [carrying out human-like
conversations]. 

These technologies, which aim to achieve human or superhuman levels of
performance on very specific tasks, are examples of so-called [narrow
artificial intelligence]. In the longer term, it might be possible to create an
[artificial general intelligence] at a human or even superhuman level and the
ways in which _that_ might change our world are difficult to imagine.  But
whatever they are, the changes are sure to be profound.

Given the rapid changes that we're likely to see in our lifetimes and the
degree to which AI is already impacting our lives, it will become increasingly
important for even non-experts to understand a bit about how artificial
intelligence works. For example, to make more informed decisions about public
policy or just to have a better idea about something that could change the
world more drastically than when humans harnessed electricity. 

## Taking the Plunge

I'm a mathematician who has decided to leave college teaching to explore these
ideas and see where they lead. In these pages I'm going to try to explain all
sorts of mathematical topics that are needed to get a handle on machine
learning, in many cases as I learn about them myself. These will range from the
very basic to the very complex and so my hope is that everyone will be able to
find a place to get started. If, like me, you're interested in finding out what
machine learning is all about, read on.

[deep neural networks]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_learning
[self-driving cars]:https://www.wired.com/tag/self-driving-cars/
[carrying out human-like conversations]: https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/05/duplex-ai-system-for-natural-conversation.html
[narrow artificial intelligence]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_AI
[artificial general intelligence]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_general_intelligence
